---
Pr-id: Our Commons
P-id: Miscelanea
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: bundle
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: Introduction: Shifting Paradigms
Article-status: accepted
Author: Thomas de Groot, Sophie Bloemen
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 1. Introduction: Shifting Paradigms

By Sophie Bloemen and Thomas de Groot

‘Europe’ is more an idea than a geographical unit. In many ways, it
remains a promise, something that one day might take shape. How we
design that promise is continuously up for debate. The current dominant
shape of the idea that we call Europe is simply not good enough. We must
reinvigorate its promise.

Our Europe is optimistic, driven by ideas and stories that have the
common good in mind. Our Europe is inspired by human flourishing and
mutual trust. Our Europe is built on generosity and hope, not on
extraction and dogma. It is built on communities and citizens, not on
markets and consumers.

The foundational stories of collective post-war reconstruction and the
mantra of ‘never again’ have lost their appeal. Europe is now facing
various forms of social and political regression, notably the rise of
new forms of nationalist, neo-fascist and undemocratic movements.

Europe needs new stories that orient us towards a brighter future. We
believe that one of these stories is that of the commons. It is the
story of people jointly stewarding resources, like water or energy or
even cities and knowledge. It is a story of communities, of
collaborative and democratic practices. The commons have been a
forgotten sector of our society and our economy. They convey the space
in which communities write their own rules. The commons presuppose
activity, communication and democratic stewardship. They move us away
from linear thinking and individualism, towards ecosystems and social
relationships.

Perceiving our shared resources — like water, land, air, cultural
heritage and scientific achievements — as global commons inspires us to
take a certain ethical perspective. It leads us to recognize the
imperative to jointly and equitably govern these resources, in a way
that maintains the wealth of our planet. It implies a regenerative
economy that sustains the planet, not an extractive one that destroys
it. Embracing the commons fosters a culture of reciprocity to bring
about a more socially and ecologically sustainable society.

Commons Network has in the last several years worked to tell that story,
to convey the logic of the commons in policy circles, in civil society
and in the public debate. Together with others, we saw the enormous
power and potential of this story and practice, the collective potential
of all commoners. We have acted as a think tank, as organisers, as
activists and advocates. We published papers, wrote articles, organised
Assemblies, met countless people and learned about thousands of
initiatives. We saw how the commons connects struggles in different
realms and bridges movements and approaches: it provides a new
vocabulary for social justice and collective action for a
social-ecological transition.

This renewed claim to community, belonging and collaborative values
makes a new politics and a new economy possible. Yes, we argue that this
vision brings us closer to the ideal of Europe as a post-nationalist
space^1^. Through trans-local solidarity and multilayered belonging, we
can escape the stand-off between detached cosmopolitanism and regressive
nationalism.

Having learned about the different practices and forms of commons and
what they need from institutions to thrive, we decided to bring it all
together. Here, we showcase the ideas, the people, the practices and the
policy implications. This book offers an insight into this growing
movement. While we are writing this, new commons initiatives are
emerging, adding to the theories and practies and further developing the
discourse.

Working on the commons, we have come to observe transformative ideas
emerging all around us. More and more people dare to imagine radically
different futures, beyond ‘there is no alternative’. More and more
policymakers are adopting new concepts like food sovereignty or ‘the
Doughnut’. More and more activists are merging anti-racism and
eco-feminism in one intersectional and emancipatory theory of change.
Even de-growth, a concept that is still too radical for most greens and
social-democrats, is slowly becoming more mainstream. We have moved past
the neoliberal consensus. We have come to recognize the limits of our
planet and the boundaries of the living world as we respect our embedded
role in it.

The commons are not primarily a political theory, but first and foremost
a practice emerging from the bottom-up. Everywhere, people are engaging
in alternative practices as part of the struggle for ecological, social
and cultural transition within their communities. Local energy
cooperatives are prioritising community wealth and open access medical
journals are sharing knowledge – these practices represent social and
cultural shifts in value models.

While societal shifts are often framed in terms of economy or
technologies, they are rooted in cultural change. Our culture reflects
and shapes our values and how we attribute meaning to our lives. Many
current community-led and social innovation initiatives contain strong
elements of practical cultural change. New social values and practices
are enabling communities to be generative instead of extractive. This is
creating a new civic and cultural ethic that is breaking with
conventional notions of citizenship and participation. The regeneration
activities of commoners showcase, above all, cultural manifestations of
new ways of daily life.

The European Union and its member states have a huge role to play in
facilitating social and ecological transition. The political project of
the European Union could be truly transformative. Yet for now, our
institutions are firmly grounded in outdated frames of thinking. Most of
the policy that originates in Brussels is based on endless growth,
markets and competition. In order to transition to a different economy
and society, we must first have a vision. It is crucial that a large
transformative vision gains the support of institutions and
policymakers.

The commons often emerge from the bottom up; they are dependent on
community processes and their logic is mostly at odds with the EU’s
institutional logic. However, we believe there is an important role for
EU politics and policy to create the right incentives, to remove hurdles
and to support this re-emerging sector. Supporting communities means
addressing the sense of losing control, identity and security. As a
post-nationalist project, the EU will, ideally, undergo a change in
consciousness away from nationalism, moving toward a flexible mode of
citizenship that allows for multiple belongings.

This publication explores these new politics and describes the commons
in different spheres of society, economy and politics. With these
stories, positions, and visions we aim to inspire but also give clear
direction. The book is divided into seven thematic sections. Most
sections have a theoretical position and a practical case study. All
sections feature influential thinkers whose voices we want to amplify.
This book is comprised of the insights of more than 20 writers,
activists and pioneers, standing on the shoulders of hundreds more.

Kate Raworth and George Monbiot invited us to Oxford to discuss the role
of the commons in their work, which led to the second chapter. In our
conversation, George Monbiot addresses the political potential of the
commons as a fundamental building block for a new ‘politics of
belonging’. Kate Raworth explains how the commons can help us arrive at
a new, different economy, one that serves people and planet.

In the next chapter, we continue to re-think what aspects of our daily
life belong to the domain of the market and the commons. Energy as a
commons is presented by Commons Network co-founder David Hammerstein
with a clear message: unless we accept de-growth as the only viable path
forward, no amount of renewable energy will help us. Cecile Blanchet
takes us on a journey to an energy cooperative in chapter 4, setting the
scene for a good overview of the current debate on renewables and energy
democracy.

In chapter 5, Jose Luis Vivero-Pol offers a passionate plea for food as
commons. Food as a system, from farmer to our plate, from the cultural
notion of food to its function in our society, should never be a
commodity, he argues. In chapter 6, Thomas de Groot investigates how
commoners on the ground are bringing this idea to life, in a case study
of FoodTopia in Spain and BuurtBuik in The Netherlands.

Urban policies are of critical importance to the emergence of the
commons. The groundbreaking work that Sheila Foster and Christian Iaione
have done in the emerging field of urban commons gives us tools to do
this. In chapter 7, they describe how they arrived at their vision. In
chapter 8, Doina Petrescu and Constantin Petcou deliver an urgent appeal
to architects to embrace the commons through their case study on R-Urban
and ‘aaa’, a collective of autonomous architects that take the commons
as the foundational principle of their work. George Monbiot returns in
chapter 9, to tell the story of Barking and Dagenham, one of the only
‘Leave-voting’ boroughs in the London area. Monbiot convincingly
presents this case study as the potential start of a national
transformation.

A citizen-based digital sphere that works for people? In chapter 10,
Sophie Bloemen, Alek Tarkowski and Paul Keller present their new vision
for a digital Europe, built on core principles like decentralisation and
digital commons. Democratic ownership is a path forward, away from an
economic dead end. That is why, in chapter 11, we asked Trebor Scholz to
write about platform cooperatives, which are a good example of
democratising the internet. How hard it is to imagine a different
internet, one without near-monopolies from SIlicon Valley and
surveillance capitalism, is shown by Commons Network fellow Mai Ishikawa
Sutton in chapter 12.

As long as we refuse to see biomedical knowledge as a commons, we will
never achieve full accessibility to medicines. That is what Sophie
Bloemen argues in chapter 13, in her invocation of the commons to
bolster the access to medicines movement. How this might work in
practice is demonstrated in chapters 14 and 15, where we present the
cases of the Drugs for Neglected Diseases Initiative (DNDi) and the
Medicines Patent Pool (MPP). Benjamin Coriat, Spring Gombe and
Jean-Francois Alesandrini of DNDi brief us in detail about how a
non-profit medicines developer functions as a commons. MPP-founder Ellen
’t Hoen gives us a detailed account of the vision and the process that
led to the Patent Pool.

Finally, we talk to commons-thinkers Michel Bauwens, Silke Helfrich and
David Bollier for an in-depth discussion about the commons movement,
what commoners can do for Europe and vice versa.

*Our Commons* is first released online, as an e-book. In the summer of
2019, the team behind this work will continue the process of organic
publication. We will release individual sections as booklets, addressed
at different audiences. We will work on a web-version of all the texts,
for easier re-use and remixing. We embrace the principle of design
global, produce local or in this case, print on demand. Towards the
autumn of 2019, we will start the process of translating this work in
Dutch, to publish it in traditional book form in The Netherlands. We
hope that *Our Commons* will inspire people to take action.
