---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 3. Commons-Based Renewable Energy

# in the Age of Climate Collapse

by David Hammerstein

*“… the main lesson to be learned from the collapses of past societies
is that a society's steep decline may begin only a decade or two after
the society reaches its peak numbers, wealth, and power.”*

Jared Diamond, Collapse^1^

One of the fallacies in our unrealistic thinking about the future is the
idea that renewable energy can substitute the fossil fuels that have
been the basis of economic growth over the last two centuries. The “100%
renewables” slogan suggests that all we have to do is change energy
technologies in order to go on with business as usual. This
techno-optimist marketing spin reinforces a certain social complacency,
leading us to grossly underestimate the great challenges that a real
energy transition would pose. The global collapse of our environment and
our climate demands much more than a change in our energy production
model. It requires us to question the basic premises of our extractive
models of agriculture, industry, tourism, transport and construction^2^.

A simple ’tech-fix’ approach to renewables is promoted to avoid
structurally challenging the basic premises of our growth-dependent and
extractive economies that cause most of the current life-threatening
climate disorders and extinctions. We can only approach 100% renewables
in a socially fair and environmentally sustainable world if we
substantially reduce our use of energy and resources by shrinking our
physical economies, especially among the wealthiest, most consumerist
20-30% of the global population. This de-growth of our economies is not
possible only by means of technical efficiency measures. It requires
major political change and state regulations in favor of sufficiency and
the preservation and regeneration of the global natural commons. This is
a daunting task^3^.

Today, solar energy and wind energy represent only around 2% of our
global energy mix, while fossil fuels supply over 80% of our energy
needs. A rapid substitution of fossil fuels by these renewable sources
would demand a war-like mobilization of people and financial means that
today is nowhere to be seen on the political horizon. Our energy
transition has not even begun in earnest while our window of opportunity
for slowing catastrophic climate change is rapidly closing. Today 98% of
global trade, 100% of aviation, 99% of vehicles, 99% of construction,
over 90% of agriculture and the vast majority of household heating are
powered by fossil fuels. The increase of renewables, which is around 5%
of current energy production (mainly hydroelectric power and biomass),
is almost exclusively focused on electricity, even though electricity
only represents 18% of global energy use. The other 82% is used mainly
for heating, transport, industry and agriculture, among other
activities. In total contradiction to what is now needed, global energy
demand grew 2.1% in 2017 while CO2 emissions rose 1.4% amidst growing
and more desperate calls for drastic CO2 reductions from the scientific
community^5-4^.

To be realistic about our energy crunch, we must first exit the denial
consensus. Due to ecological constraints, our present growth-driven and
expansive economy based on cheap fossil fuels cannot be maintained. We
are living the beginning of the end of a historical anomaly of sustained
economic growth based on access to abundant, easily accessible fuels and
other raw materials. But it is precisely this economic growth that has
facilitated the growth of liberal democratic societies and the
consolidation of individual freedoms and human rights. The structural
lack of sustained global economic growth, coupled with climate change,
resource scarcity and ethnic conflicts are stressing our democratic
liberal societies. These situations are increasingly exploited by
extreme right-wing authoritarian and populist movements.

> Major political, economic and cultural shifts towards sufficiency,
> self-contention, sharing, social equality and redistribution of wealth
> need to take place to avoid violent societal collapse.

Nevertheless, we can still try to mitigate or prevent this crisis. We
need to consciously slow down and re-orient our economies toward
re-localization of production and the regeneration of communities and
nature. If we start now, the down-scaling of our economies can be done
in a relatively organized and fair way, with relative social acceptance.
Major political, economic and cultural shifts towards sufficiency,
self-contention, sharing, social equality and redistribution of wealth
need to take place to avoid violent societal collapse. If we maintain
our present expansive course we might very well be condemned to an
abrupt and chaotic economic stagnation that protects the privileges of
the most powerful and locks out the majority of the population by means
of violence and repression.

Most political leaders have placed all their money on one very
improbable bet: the world economy will continue to grow indefinitely
thanks to some miraculous technological inventions that have yet to be
invented. This flies in the face of overwhelming scientific evidence of
humanity’s tremendous overshoot of the Earth’s carrying capacity. Our
leaders cannot act responsibly because they cannot escape their world
view of never-ending global competition, extraction and economic growth
that is impossible on a finite planet. They are ideological prisoners of
a diabolical pact: in exchange for a few generations of intense economic
growth with relative social well-being and democratic freedom, we shall
all be forced to accept some form of autocracy in the context of
environmental demise and scarcity.

The energy transition to confront climate change is not mainly about
increasing renewable energy production but about quickly reducing CO2
and other greenhouse gases: it is not principally about doing good
things but drastically and urgently reducing the bad. More renewables
does not necessarily mean less use of oil or gas nor less ecological
destruction of our life support ecosystem. More electric cars does not
mean less oil consumption by conventional cars, more organic food
production does not mean less use of pesticides by intensive
agriculture, more recycling and re-use does not mean less resource
extraction. A “circular economy” that does not reduce the total volume
of resource extraction can create an illusion of sustainability as
explained by the “Jevons paradox”^6^. To make a difference, renewables
must substitute fossil fuels quickly and to the greatest degree
possible, while overall energy and resource consumption must be reduced
drastically. This is a monumental task that most politicians would say
is totally unrealistic. But today’s political realism has little to do
with the needs of our future social-ecological well-being.

> More electric cars does not mean less oil consumption by conventional
> cars, more organic food production does not mean less use of
> pesticides by intensive agriculture, more recycling and re-use does
> not mean less resource extraction.

Any positive energy transition also needs to take into account in its
cycle of life and value chain the preservation of biodiversity, fertile
soil, rivers, forests, oceans and aquifers. The production and use of
energy in industrial, agricultural and urban extractive activities
contributes heavily to the destruction of our basic life support
systems. It would be a horribly pyrrhic victory to finally achieve
plentiful, cheap renewable energy while our systems of life-support of
water, soil and biodiversity are fatally depleted and over-used in the
very process of constructing an energy transition.

Relative decoupling of economic growth from CO2 emissions is also a
false path. Today there is no decoupling of economic growth from
environmental destruction in absolute terms^10^ and even the relative
disassociation of economic growth from the growth of CO2 emissions is
usually a statistical manipulation that does not count the emissions
produced or accumulated in their imported materials, products and
services from every corner of the Earth^7^.

## The EU and the Tragedy of the Energy Anti-Commons

Climate change and many other ecological problems caused by the use of
fossil fuels are an example of the tragedy of the commons, because the
essential common resources of air, water, soil and biodiversity are
under-regulated, over-used, over-extracted and over-exploited. These
problems are also paradoxically an example of a tragedy of the
anti-commons, because they are caused by unbridled and intensive
enclosure, extraction and privatization of common resources. The
influence of enormous energy companies on the EU and its member states
through corporate regulatory capture, revolving-door corruption and
strong lobbying strategies prevent stronger regulation of our
climate-energy commons and protect the private rights of companies with
dominant positions over key energy infrastructures and services. Today
there are still legal barriers to the blooming and dominance of
community-based or municipal renewable energy.

While large, centralized energy companies are starting to invest more
and more in renewable sources, they are often not best suited for
alleviating our social-ecological dilemma, primarily because they have
little incentive to reduce overall energy consumption or to prioritize
the social engagement of local communities in their commercial
operations. The more energy they sell and the more energy is consumed,
the more profits they make. The more centralized and rigid their
physical and governance infrastructures are, the more vulnerable and
less resilient they are to crises.

Climate technologies that can play an important role in energy
transition are often not shared as quickly with countries in the Global
South as they could be. This is partly due to intellectual property
protections and a resistance to sharing know-how. In this conflict, the
EU fights to enclose climate technology knowledge, which should be a
common good, within United Nations forums (for example, the Paris
Climate Talks in 2015), giving priority to European private industrial
interests as opposed to calls from the Global South for more affordable
access to climate-friendly technologies.

> There is a surprising over-confidence that the same centralized energy
> model that got us into this mess is also going to get us out of it.

In general, despite some recent positive legal change, the EU’s energy
strategy has been oriented primarily toward big energy companies
promoting large gas pipelines, giant energy infrastructures, and modest
CO2 reductions (still light years away from fulfilling global climate
needs). Despite the fact that more and more Europeans are producing
their energy locally or at home, most proposed European market
regulations and budgets have not prioritized community-controlled or
self-produced renewable energy, they have not offered sufficient
financial support for community energy and they have not sufficiently
defended the right to re-sell electricity among prosumers (at once
producers of energy and consumers). EU policies have not sufficiently
supported community-based feed-in tariffs or micro-grid infrastructures
to support local renewables. Little has been done to eliminate massive
direct or indirect subsidies to large gas, coal and nuclear projects.

There is a surprising over-confidence that the same centralized energy
model that got us into this mess is also going to get us out of it.
Instead it should be evident that without major social change in the
relations of power between large energy companies and the common good,
there will be no paradigm shifting energy change in favour of equality,
democracy and a radical reduction of emissions. A much larger part of
the EU energy budget should be earmarked for community renewable
projects and compatible infrastructures, with broad citizen
participation. This would help optimize resilient and more flexible
energy supply costs through more efficient, short, and visible
distribution loops while promoting flexible local energy autonomy. With
this approach the EU would “commonify” a decentralised energy system as
opposed to the current principal strategy of commodifying a centralised
one.

The commons approach points at a number of problems and principles
concerning renewables and the fight against climate change. In order to
mitigate and adapt to climate disorder we need to focus on social and
political strategies that prioritize solidarity, sufficiency and limits.
The natural commons is both the source and the sink of our energy model.
No one can claim ownership of the sun, the wind, the sea or the air.
While it belongs to no one, we need to strongly and democratically
regulate its use in a socially equitable matter with the aim of
maintaining a sufficient level of sustenance of human and natural life.

> For a successful and rapid transition of our catastrophic energy
> model, we need strong political promotion of non-profit,
> decentralised, citizen-owned distributed energy systems that
> prioritise both consumer and climate profits over extractive private
> profits based on more consumption.

In the context of global climate collapse, much greater energy sobriety
is a prerequisite of energy justice. Considering the finite carrying
capacity of our climate commons, there is no sustainable way of
alleviating energy poverty of people globally without at the same time
alleviating energy obesity in wealthier countries of the North. When
energy is governed as a common resource that is pooled by a community
that governs semi-autonomous infrastructures, resilient sufficiency
coupled with efficiency can take priority over expansion, growth and
profits. Local stakeholders usually have very different interests from
corporate shareholders. Large, centralised and privatized energy
technology is often not appropriate for the real needs, the human scale
of democratic control of a visible, circular and resilient local
economy. In contrast, commons-based renewable energy is usually
dimensioned to satisfy basic social needs that respect bioregional
limits, boundaries and universal sharing.

Appropriate energy technology and knowledge developed with public money
also needs to revert back into the regeneration of the energy commons by
local communities (and with the Global South) through open source
technology transfer or socially responsible licensing instead of being
patented and privatised by private companies. Personal data on energy
consumption and habits also need to be governed as a commons by local
communities and municipalities without data commercialization or
marketing by digital platforms.

For a successful and rapid transition of our catastrophic energy model,
we need strong political promotion of non-profit, decentralised,
citizen-owned distributed energy systems that prioritise both consumer
and climate profits over extractive private profits based on more
consumption. This means lower energy demand, greater social acceptance
of new renewable installations and a new cultural paradigm that breaks
with big centralized market lock-ins we have today, wherein most
citizens cannot even imagine receiving energy other than from large
multinational corporations.

This means turning public investments upside-down with a major shift
toward localization. Instead of investing in giant centralised
interconnecting power lines, the priority should be aiding the
installation of community micro-grids where prosumers, producers and
consumers are allowed to share, sell and buy community-based electricity
production. This paradigm shift favours demand management, much greater
citizen consciousness of saving energy and the building of flexible
resilience. This must happen in the face of future social-ecological
chaos and impending climate breakdown by investing in pooled district
heating, renewable energy storage and increased local autonomy^8^.

We need the application of an EU energy subsidiarity principle on all
levels of EU policy. This would mean that EU financing would be
conditioned to support fluctuating renewable energy installations as
close to the energy consumers as socio-economically possible. Large
interconnecting power lines should only be built after implementing
local and regional intelligent energy systems for fluctuating renewable
energy. Majority citizen/municipal ownership of all new energy
facilities should be supported by EU, national and local funding and
legislation.

The EU’s new “Clean Energy Package” approved in spring 2019 now
recognizes citizen energy communities as an essential part of the energy
transition. Now it is crucial that the rights of individual citizens or
citizens collectives are actively supported institutionally on all
government levels for producing, supplying and consuming renewable
energy without any discriminatory treatment in favor of large private
energy companies^9^.

The renewable energy commons is part of a larger strategy that at once
regenerates communities and the living world through democratic
governance, local control and common good values. The global
multiplication of these energy commoning initiatives can play a key role
in building the resilience, know-how and cooperation we desperately need
to face the enormous social-ecological challenges of the coming years.
