---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 4. Energy Commons: The Missing Link Between Energy Transition and Climate Justice

by Cecile Blanchet

In 2019, only oil lobbyists and shabby orange politicians persist in
denying the influence of human activities on the Earth’s climate.
Scientific evidence is piling up and we know that we must change our
ways. The concept of energy transition has become mainstream. However,
governments have remained remarkably motionless. They are so inactive
that kids strike school and demand climate justice in front of the
United Nations’ Conference of Parties. They are so immobile that citizen
groups actually sue their governments for their lack of climate action.
And when governments attempt to do something, it is so unjust that
people take to the streets even during the coldest months of the year,
screaming, filled with rage and frustration. Our leaders have forgotten
that the poorer half of our societies should not have to clean up the
mess produced by the richest half. That it should not be our kids
cleaning up our mess.

## Doing It Ourselves

In the face of the lack of political will, an interesting and vivid
grassroots movement has taken shape to reclaim our energy systems. From
households to city politics, and even at the European level, there has
been an unprecedented involvement from the public into energy and
electricity matters. This has for instance taken the shape of energy
cooperatives. According to the European Federation of renewable energy
cooperatives, RESCOOP^1^, there are at present some 1,250 energy
communities in which a million people throughout Europe are involved.
Through the RESCOOP federation, these groups actively lobby at a
European level to bend the legislation towards promoting and supporting
energy cooperatives.

This model of energy cooperativism dates back to the late 1990s in
Germany and was enabled by a set of disruptive laws supporting the
production of renewable energy. This bill kick-started the German energy
transition (dubbed “Energiewende”), which has become a landmark and is
being widely copied^2^. The two main pillars were defined in the Feed-In
Act of 2000: the priority of renewable sources to the grid and feed-in
tariffs (fixed prices paid for renewable energy).

The particularity of this framework is that it has enabled small players
to enter the game. Citizen cooperatives and households have especially
benefited, because a fixed price for each kilowatt hour (KWH) could be
sold back to the grid, which gave them more space to invest in new
technologies. From the late 1990s onwards, the number of cooperatives in
Germany has grown exponentially, reaching 900 in 2019^3^. It is a model
that comes with many advantages. Let’s virtually visit one of these
cooperatives together.

## The Revived Village

It's half raining and the landscape is dissolved in the mist when we
enter Feldheim after a one-hour drive from Berlin. Apart from a large
blue sign at the entrance of the village, nothing distinguishes the
Energieautarker Ortsteil Feldheim (Self-Sustainable Village Feldheim)
from the other villages in Brandenburg: all have similar houses with
their neat little front-gardens along a similar straight road.

There's a bit of wind, it's cold and nobody ventures outside, except for
our guide, Herr Kappert, his hat pulled all the way down, who comes to
greet us. He leads us to the brand-new visitor's center. It's big and
clean, and somehow reminds me of the over-dimensioned churches in small
villages along the Camino de Santiago in France, designed to host the
pilgrims on their journey. Indeed, I feel like a pilgrim reaching a
Mecca for community-based off-grid energy projects. Once pointed in the
right direction, we see the big giants peering through the fog, all
turned in the same direction and rotating out of phase.

Contrary to its appearance, Feldheim is very special. Its uniqueness
does not lie in the fact that there is about one wind turbine for every
three people here (47 wind turbines for 148 inhabitants). That is
actually quite common in Germany nowadays, especially in the former DDR.
The special thing here is that the inhabitants are largely involved in
the project.

At the turn of the century, Feldheim was just another post-communist
village in Brandenburg: people were leaving, the school had closed down
and unemployment was affecting more than 25% of the population. But in
1995, a joint venture between the villagers and a small local energy
developer,EnergieQuelle GmbH, installed a first batch of four wind
turbines. The success of that operation soon led to the installation of
another 40 wind turbines, a biogas factory, a solar park, a giant
battery and a parallel electricity and heating grid. This means that the
village is now self-sufficient in its energy needs. There are several
other spill-over effects from these energy developments in Feldheim.

As we strolled through the village to go to the windfarm, I approached
Mr. Kappert and asked him whether the price of the real-estate in the
village has suffered from the installation of so many wind turbines. He
looked at me a little puzzled, laughed and said: “no, not at all, why?”
So I explained that people in the media often talk about the opposition
from local populations to windfarms and the recurring argument of
plummeted prices of real-estate next to large projects. Mr. Kappert said
that the project is an asset to the village and that it has probably
increased the value of houses. And there is a major difference:
external, imposed projects versus internal, self-managed and
self-designed projects.

> All over Europe, a movement to reclaim public services from the
> private sector is gaining traction.

In Feldheim, the project was developed in collaboration with the
population over a period of more than 20 years and has been designed to
fit the needs and specificities of the village. For instance, the fact
that the local industry is mostly relying on agriculture rendered the
installation of a biogas production unit (which enables the conversion
of animals’ manure and land-crop waste into natural gas) desirable and
efficient. This shows how important it is to determine the appropriate
technology for a community.

As we chatted, Mr. Kappert told me that the success of the project had a
snowball effect on the life in the village. The income generated by the
windfarm could be reinvested in other local ventures, such as a company
designing arrays for solar parks. This, together with the maintenance of
the windfarm and the biogas unit, created jobs so that the employment
rate is now virtually 100% in Feldheim.

How can such a model be spilling over in neighboring villages? What
happens with families who do not have the financial means to get
involved in the project, in which a sum of 1500 euros was required to
enter the cooperative? These important questions regarding inclusiveness
and reproducibility are not fully answered by the cooperative model and
we must turn our sight to re-municipalization of electricity utilities.

## Municipal Utilities and the Energy Commons

According to a recent report from the Right to Energy Coalition^4^,
poorer households in many European countries face moderate to extreme
levels of fuel poverty. This means that these families can hardly access
energy to cook and heat their houses. The report also shows that
households spend an increasing proportion of their income on energy
expenditure (which can reach up to 33%). Although affecting most
strongly southern and eastern European countries, this problem is also
seen in cities like London, where the government has issued a plan to
tackle fuel poverty^5^.

All over Europe, a movement to reclaim public services from the private
sector is gaining traction^6^. Municipal utilities are seen as a tool to
control tariffs, steward the energy transition and fight energy poverty.
And indeed, cities have a crucial role to play as they are accountable
to all citizens and are thus by definition more inclusive than
cooperatives. The re-municipalisation movement is complex and involves a
large range of interactions between local initiatives and governments,
intrinsic motivations and level of achievement (i.e., from full purchase
to public-private-partnerships).

An aspect of the energy transition which is often overlooked is the need
to drastically reduce our consumption of energy (a decrease by 50% is
planned in the German “Energiewende” plan^7^). The cheapest and cleanest
energy is the one which is not produced and not used: all power plants,
even those harvesting renewable sources of energy, have large impacts on
the environment (e.g., by using rare earth elements for wind turbines).

> The cheapest and cleanest energy is the one which is not produced and
> not used: all power plants, even those harvesting renewable sources of
> energy, have large impacts on the environment.

Energy efficiency and conservation measures cannot be undertaken by
for-profit energy providers, because they have an incentive to sell as
much energy as possible. Municipal utilities, by effectively shifting
energy from the commodities market to the commons, can help to manage
the resource more efficiently and have a decisive role to play. An
example for this is provided by the Sustainable Energy Utility in the US
state of Delaware^8^, which is a community-based institution aiming at
designing and financing local energy projects. The idea is to consider
the energy consumption of a community globally, with the primary aim
being to save it: when energy is needed, the SEU should implement an
appropriate renewable technology, and incorporate heat and transport
systems in the design^9^.

> The next step is therefore to combine the governance model of
> cooperatives with the inclusiveness of municipal utilities in order to
> implement a fully democratic and just energy transition.

Although municipal energy utilities have a great potential in achieving
a just transition towards cleaner energy, the question of the governance
is not always adequately tackled. In Hamburg for instance, a successful
citizen campaign and referendum in 2013 compelled the city government to
buy the energy (electricity, gas and heating) networks back from private
operators. Two publicly-owned companies are now operating the grids, but
citizens are still seen as clients and have no decisionmaking power. The
next step is therefore to combine the governance model of cooperatives
with the inclusiveness of municipal utilities in order to implement a
fully democratic and just energy transition.

In many places of the world, privatisation of the energy market led to
the appropriation of productive land by large multinationals (think of
solar farms in the Sahara to feed the European grid), with very little
or no spillover for the local economy^10^. This could be described as
cases of enclosure of the commons and energy colonialism. Furthermore,
the present “over-grazing” of our finite energy resources, which results
from our “energy obesity”, questions the inter-generational liability:
our right to access energy should be limited by the legacy that we will
leave to our kids. Relocating energy in the commons (by de-privatising
or re-municipalising) would be a powerful way to address these
questions, by linking production to consumption and re-engaging our
liability as energy users. Finally, considering energy as a commons
would allow to benefit from the creative power and experience of
commoners to manage and share the resource.
