---
Pr-id: Our Commons
P-id: Miscelanea
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: bundle
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: Ostrom in the City
Article-status: accepted
Author: Sheila R. Foster, Christian Iaione
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


![](imgs/Ch_3_Re_claiming_cities.jpg)
Reclaiming Cities

# 7. Ostrom in the City: Design Principles and Practices for the Urban Commons

by Sheila R. Foster & Christian Iaione

*This text is an edited and shortened version of ‘Ostrom in the City:
Design Principles and Practices for the Urban Commons’ by Sheila R.
Foster and Christian Iaione, published in the Routledge Handbook of the
Study of the Commons, edited by Blake Hudson, Jonathan Rosenboom and Dan
Cole (Routledge 2019).^32^*

## Introduction

If cities are the places where most of the world’s population will be
living in the next century, as is predicted, it is not surprising that
they have become sites of contestation over use and access to urban
land, open space, infrastructure, and culture. The question posed by
Saskia Sassen in a recent essay — who owns the city? — is arguably at
the root of these contestations and of social movements that resist the
enclosure of cities by economic elites.^1^ One answer to the question of
who owns the city is that we all do. In our work we argue that the city
is a common good or a “commons” — a shared resource that belongs to all
of its inhabitants, and to the public more generally.

We have been writing about the urban commons for the last decade, very
much inspired by the work of Jane Jacobs and Elinor Ostrom. The idea of
the urban commons captures the ecological view of the city that
characterizes Jane Jacobs classic work, The Death and Life of Great
American Cities.^2^ It also builds on Elinor Ostrom’s finding that
common resources are capable of being collectively managed by users in
ways that support their needs yet sustains the resource over the long
run.^3^

Jacobs analyzed cities as complex, organic systems and observed the
activity within them at the neighborhood and street level, much like an
ecologist would study natural habitats and the species interacting
within them. She emphasized the diversity of land use, of people and
neighborhoods, and the interaction among them as important to
maintaining the ecological balance of urban life in great cities like
New York. Jacob’s critique of the urban renewal slum clearance programs
of the 1940s and 50s in the United States was focused not just on the
destruction of physical neighborhoods, but also on the destruction of
the “irreplaceable social capital” — the networks of residents who build
and strengthen working relationships over time through trust and
voluntary cooperation — necessary for “self governance” of urban
neighborhoods.^4^ As political scientist Douglas Rae has written, this
social capital is the “civic fauna” of urbanism.^5^

> Jacobs analyzed cities as complex, organic systems and observed the
> activity within them at the neighborhood and street level, much like
> an ecologist would study natural habitats and the species interacting
> within them.

This social capital — the norms and networks of trust and voluntary
cooperation — is also at the core of urban “commoning.” The term
commoning, popularized by historian Peter Linebaugh, captures the
relationship between physical resources and the communities that live
near them, to utilize and depend upon them for essential human needs.<super>6</super>
In other words, much of what gives a particular urban resource its
value, and normative valence, is the function of the human activity and
social network in which the resource is situated. As such, disputes over
the destruction or loss of community gardens, of open and green spaces,
and of spaces for small scale commercial and artistic activity are
really disputes about the right to access and use (or share) urban
resources to provide goods necessary for human flourishing.^7^

The urban commons framework thus raises the question to which Elinor
Ostrom’s groundbreaking work provides an intriguing answer. Ostrom
demonstrated that there are options for managing shared, common goods
which are neither exclusively public nor private. She found examples all
over the world of resource users cooperatively managing a range of
natural resources — land, fisheries, and forests — using “rich mixtures
of public and private instrumentalitie.”^3^ Ostrom identified the
conditions and “design principles” which increase the likelihood of
long-term, collective governance of shared resources. In many of these
examples, users work with government agencies and public officials to
design, enforce and monitor the rules for using and managing the
resource.

> Is it possible to effectively manage shared urban resources without
> privatizing them or exercising monopolistic public regulatory control
> over them, especially given that regulators tend to be captured by
> economic elites?

Building in part on the insights of Vincent Ostrom, and others, she
referred to this kind of decision making as “polycentric” to capture the
idea that while the government remains an essential player in
facilitating, supporting, and even supplying the necessary tools to
govern shared resources, the government is not the monopoly decision
maker.^8^ Polycentric systems have multiple governing entities or
authorities at different scales and each governing unit has a high
degree of independence to make norms and rules within its own domain.^9^
Polycentric systems also can unlock what she called “public
entrepreneurship”— opening the public sector to innovation in providing,
producing, and encouraging the co-production of essential goods and
services at the local level. Public entrepreneurship often involves
putting heterogenous processes together in complementary and effective
ways.^10^

As such, our work has explored whether the commons can be a framework
for addressing a host of internal and external resource challenges
facing cities, and specifically to rethinking how city space and shared
goods are used, who has access to them, and how their resources are
allocated and distributed. Recognizing that there are many tangible and
intangible urban resources on which differently situated individuals and
communities depend to meet a variety of human needs, what might it look
like to bring more polycentric tools to govern the city, or parts of the
city, as a “commons?” Is it possible to effectively manage shared urban
resources without privatizing them or exercising monopolistic public
regulatory control over them, especially given that regulators tend to
be captured by economic elites? Can the Ostrom design principles be
applied to cities to rethink the governance of cities and the management
of their resources? We think they cannot be simply adapted to the city
context without significant modification.

Cities and many kinds of urban commons are different from natural
resources and more traditional commons in important ways. This is why,
starting ten years ago, we both began to explore the governance of the
urban commons as a separate body of study. First, investigating
individually how different kinds of urban assets such as community
gardens, parks, neighborhoods and urban infrastructure such as
urban roads could be reconceived as urban commons, and later jointly
to conceive the whole city as a commons.^11,12^ We realized that we needed a
different approach to bridge urban studies and commons studies and
therefore to pose a slightly different set of questions for the
governance of the urban commons.^13^ We also needed to define a
different set of design principles for the management of urban commons
in the city and the city itself as a commons.

> To say that the city is a commons is to suggest that the city is a
> shared resource — open to, shared with, and belonging to many types of
> people.

For this reason, we have been surveying and mapping 100+ cities around
the world and 200+ examples of urban commons within them.^14^ The goal
of this research project is to enhance our collective knowledge about
the various ways to govern urban commons, and the city itself as a
commons, in different geographic, social and economic contexts. From
this study, we have extracted a set of design principles that are
distinctively different from those offered by Elinor Ostrom. They which
can be applied to govern different kinds of urban commons, and cities as
commons. Specifically, we investigate whether these design principles
can help cities transition to fairer and more inclusive, sustainable,
resilient futures given existing patterns of urbanization and the
contested nature of urban resources such as public spaces, open or
vacant land, abandoned and underutilized structures, and aging
infrastructure. In our study, we see examples of how these resources can
be governed as a commons in cities around the world.

## The City as a Commons

To say that the city is a commons is to suggest that the city is a
shared resource — open to, shared with, and belonging to many types of
people. In this sense, the city shares some of the classic problems of a
common pool resource — the difficulty of excluding people and the need
to design effective rules, norms and institutions for resource
stewardship and governance. Indeed, “the city analog to placing an
additional cow on the commons is the decision to locate one’s firm or
household, along with the privately owned structure that contains it, in
a particular position within an urban area.”^15^ Congestion and
overconsumption of city space can quickly result in rivalrous conditions
in which one person’s use of space subtracts from the benefits of that
space for others. For instance, different kinds of urban infrastructure
(roads, telecommunications systems, water systems, parks) otherwise
considered to be a nonrivalrous public good can become rivalrous either
through increased demand or because of regulatory slippage.^16^

In addition to more traditional concerns about congestion and rivalry,
the openness of cities also raises the question of distribution in the
commons. Many contestations of city space and resources revolve around
the question of how best to “share” the finite resources of the city
among a variety of users and uses.<super>7</super> To be sure, distributive concerns
fall outside of the considerations that motivated Garret Hardin’s
Tragedy of the Commons — i.e., consuming resources beyond the point
where they benefit anyone and in fact reduce the overall benefit of the
resource for everyone.^17^ But Ostrom’s institutional approach to
managing shared resources applies to a much broader range of human
behavior and social dilemmas than avoiding suboptimal results from the
cumulative actions of rational actors.^18^ Ostrom’s work generated an
approach that can be used in the analysis and design of effective
institutions (or instruments) to manage not just common pool resources
but many different types of shared resources.

The “commons,” as defined by scholars who build on Ostrom’s
institutional analysis and development (IAD) approach, is as much a
reference to community management or governance of shared resources as
it is to the nature of the resource itself. “The basic characteristic
that distinguishes commons from noncommons is institutionalized sharing
of resources among members of a community”.^19^ As such, it is not
surprising to see the emergence of “new” commons — or nontraditional
common pool resources — such as knowledge commons, cultural commons,
infrastructure commons, neighborhood commons, among others.^20^ These
new commons seek to provide an alternative to the private/public
(government) binary of governance solutions. These new kinds of commons
focus on “communities working together in self-governing ways to protect
resources from enclosure or to build newly open-shared resources”.^20^

It is tempting, in asking whether shared urban resources (including the
city itself) can be governed by local communities working together, to
apply Ostrom’s design principles to the city and to apply them to the
management of many kinds of public and shared resources in the city. For
many reasons, however, Ostrom’s ideas cannot be wholly adapted to the
city the way they have been used to understand the management and
governance of natural resources. Ostrom’s framework needs to be adapted
to the reality of urban environments, which are already congested,
heavily regulated and socially and economically complex. Without such
adaptation, Ostrom’s design principles will be lost in translation.

Ostrom’s study focused mainly on close knit communities in which it was
clear who was from the place and who was not (principle 1). For these
communities, social control/monitoring and social sanctioning were two
central pillars of Ostrom’s design principles for the governance
structure that communities often put in place to manage a common pool
resource (principles 5 and 6). For this reason, she observed that rules
of cooperation among users were written or modified by those who would
be entrusted with both the duty to obey them and the responsibility to
enforce them (principle 3). The fact that these rules were written by
the same community of users that apply them suggested the need to leave
some room for adaptation of such rules to local needs and conditions
(principle 2). Of course, these structures and rules were premised on
the assumption that communities' right to self-govern the resource would
be recognized by outside authorities (principle 4).

> Ostrom’s framework needs to be adapted to the reality of urban
> environments, which are already congested, heavily regulated and
> socially and economically complex. Without such adaptation, Ostrom’s
> design principles will be lost in translation.

Ostrom found, however, that for more complex resources this governance
responsibility or power was shared with other actors to form nested
enterprises (principle 8). Notwithstanding the above, she observed that
conflicts might arise because even the most united communities have
internal fractions and therefore require accessible, low-cost tools to
solve their own disputes (principle 7). These are the basic design
principles which for years have been driving the study and observation
of common, shared resources — namely scarce, congestible, renewable
natural resources such as rivers, lakes, fisheries, and forests.

Cities and many kinds of urban resources are different from natural
resources and more traditional commons in ways that render necessary
adjustments to some of Ostrom’s principles. First, cities are typically
not exhaustible nor nonrenewable, although they can become quite fragile
over time due to internal and external threats. There are, of course,
natural resources such as lakes, rivers, trees, and wetlands in urban
environments that can be rendered quite vulnerable by rapid
urbanization, migration, and landscape change.^21^

Because they resemble in most ways traditional common pool resources,
researchers have approached the possibility for collective governance
and polycentric management of these “urban commons” in a similar
fashion.^22^ However, much of the city consists of built urban
infrastructure — open squares, parks, buildings, land, streets, roads
and highways — which can be purposed and repurposed for different uses
and users. In this way, these resources —the kind of “urban commons” to
which we refer — are quite distinct in character and design from the
forests, underwater basins and irrigation systems that were the subject
of Elinor Ostrom’s study of common pool resource governance.

Second, cities and many of their resources are what we might call
“constructed” commons, the result of emergent social processes and
institutional design.^23^ As with knowledge commons, the urban commons
often require the creation of governance or management structures that
allow for not only the sharing of existing resources but also the
production of new resources which will be shared by a group or community
of actors.^23^ The process of constructing a commons — what some refer
to as “commoning” — involves a collaborative process of bringing
together a wide spectrum of actors that work together to co-design
and co-produce shared, common goods and services at different
scales.^24,25^ They can be created at the scale of the city, the district,
the neighborhood, or the block level.

Third, cities do not exist in a pre-political space. Rather, cities are
heavily regulated environments and thus any attempt to bring the commons
to the city must confront the law and politics of the city.^11^ Managing
and creating urban common resources most often requires changing or
tweaking (or even hacking, in a sense) the regulation of public and
private property and working through the administrative branches of
local government to enable and/or protect collaborative forms of
resource management. Legal and property experimentation is thus a core
feature of constructing different kinds of urban commons.^26^

Fourth, cities are incredibly complex and socially diverse systems which
bring together not only many different types of resources but also many
types of people.^27^ Because of this diversity and the presence of often
thick local (and sublocal) politics, social and economic tensions and
conflicts occur at a much higher rate and pace than many natural
environments. The economic and political complexity of cities also means
that governance of urban commons cannot be just about communities
governing themselves. Rather, collective governance of urban commons
almost always involves some forms of nested governance — perhaps
involving other levels of government — and in most cases cooperation
with other urban actors and sectors.^28^

## Design Principles for the Urban Commons

Based on these differences, we began to think anew about design
principles for the urban commons, taking into account what Ostrom
learned about successful governance of natural resources commons. While
many of her principles have clear applicability to constructed urban
commons — such as recognition by higher authorities (principle 7), the
importance of nestedness for complex resources (principles 8), the
existence of collective governance arrangements (principle 3), and
resource adaptation to local conditions (principle 2) — others are of
limited utility or need to be adapted to the urban context.

For instance, communities should drive, manage, and own the process of
governing shared urban resources, but we have seen time and time again
that they can rarely avoid dealing with the state and the market. While
this can be true of natural commons, and rural communities, we think
both the state and the market are even more omnipresent in cities,
making it difficult to side step them over the long run. As such, we
observe that many types of urban commons tend to benefit from
cooperation with other than internal community members and resource
users. Rather, they need to collaborate and manage resources with other
commons-minded actors, such as those constituting knowledge institutions
and civil society organizations.

> Communities should drive, manage, and own the process of governing
> shared urban resources, but we have seen time and time again that they
> can rarely avoid dealing with the state and the market.

We have observed that in contexts where the State is the strongest, and
markets are not as strong, local and provincial government actors can
lend assistance to, and form a solid alliance with, communities to
advance collective governance of urban resources. In this sense, the
State generally acts as an enabler of cooperation and pooling of
resources with other actors.

On the other hand, where the State is weak or weaker, either because of
corruption or lack of resources, the market seems to be the only answer
to enable the pooling of resources (i.e. human, economic, cognitive,
etc.) needed for collective action and collaborative management of urban
resources. The market could subsidize the commons if proper legal
structures and participatory processes are put in place and there is
sufficient social and political capital among resource users to
negotiate with market actors.

In both cases, the concept of “pooling” seems to capture the true
essence of commons-based projects and policies in the urban environment.
For these reasons, we have identified in our work two core principles
underlying many kinds of urban commons as an enabling state and
pooling economies.^11,29^

We also observed for instance that technology in cities plays a key role
in enabling collaboration and sustainability, as well as pooling users
of urban assets, shared infrastructure, and open data management.
Further, urban commons-based governance solutions are cutting-edge
prototypes and therefore often require careful research and
implementation. In other words, they are experimental: new approaches
and new methodologies are constantly being developed and require
prototyping, monitoring and evaluation.

These basic empirical observations are now the cornerstone of a much
larger and scientifically driven research project that we established
and call the “Co-Cities Project.” The idea of the “Co-City” is based
on five basic design principles, or dimensions, extracted from our
practice in the field and the cases that we identified as sharing
similar approaches, values and methodologies.^30^ While some of these design
principles resonate with Ostrom’s principles, they are each adapted to
the context of the urban commons and the realities of constructing
common resources in the city. We have distilled five key design
principles for the urban commons:

• Principle 1: Collective Governance (or co-governance) refers to the
presence of a multistakeholder governance scheme whereby the community
emerges as an actor and partners (through sharing, collaboration,
cooperation, and coordination) with four other possible categories of
urban actors in a loosely coupled system;

• Principle 2: Enabling State expresses the role of the State (usually
local public authorities) in facilitating the creation of urban commons
and supporting collective governance arrangements for the management and
sustainability of the urban commons;

• Principle 3: Social and Economic Pooling refers to the presence of
autonomous institutions (e.g., civic, financial, social, economic, etc.)
that are open, participatory, and managed or owned by local communities
operating within non-mainstream economic systems (e.g. cooperative,
social and solidarity, circular, cultural, or collaborative economies,
etc.) that pool resources and stakeholders often resulting in the
creation of new opportunities (e.g. jobs, skills, education, etc.) and
services (e.g. housing, care, utilities, etc.) in underserved areas of
the city or for vulnerable inhabitants;

• Principle 4: Experimentalism is the presence of an adaptive,
place-based and iterative approach to design legal and policy
innovations that enable the urban commons;

• Principle 5: Tech Justice highlights access, participation,
co-management and/or co-ownership of technological and digital urban
infrastructure and data as an enabling driver of cooperation and
co-creation of urban commons.

These design principles articulate the types of conditions and factors
that we observe are present and that instantiate the city as a
cooperative space in which various forms of urban commons not only
emerge but are sustainable. These conditions shape and define what we
call a “co-city.” The concept of the co-city imagines the city as an
infrastructure on which participants can share resources, engage in
collective decision-making and co-production of shared urban resources
and services, supported by open data and technology, guided by
principles of distributive justice. A co-city is based on polycentric
governance of a variety of urban resources such as environmental,
cultural, knowledge and digital goods that are co-managed through
contractual or institutionalized public-community or
public-private-community partnerships.

Polycentric urban governance involves resource pooling and cooperation
between five possible categories of actors — social innovators or the
unorganized public, public authorities, businesses, civil society
organizations, and knowledge institutions —the so-called “quintuple
helix governance” approach^31^. These co-governance arrangements have
three main aims: fostering social innovation in urban welfare provision,
spurring collaborative economies as a driver of local economic
development, and promoting inclusive urban regeneration of blighted
areas. Public authorities play an important enabling role in creating
and sustaining the co-city.

The ultimate goal of a co-city, we believe, is the creation of a more
just and democratic city, consistent with the Lefebvrian approach of the
right to the city.^7^

## Conclusion

The above design principles and practice are based on our observation
and study of the ways that a variety of resources in cities, both
existing and created, are being managed or governed by local communities
in a cooperative fashion with other actors and often enabled by
government bodies and officials. The five design principles, and some of
the mechanisms through which they manifest, together with the co-city
policy cycle/process, compose the beta version of what we call “the
co-city protocol.”^30^ We interpret such protocol as a language that could
guide collaboration among urban communities experimenting with the
governance of the urban commons, as well as the exchange of ideas and
practices on the commons at the urban level without impairing
institutional diversity and adaptiveness. Much like in the digital and
open source world, this protocol would allow local communities to build
a shared language that could be iteratively updated and could increase
shared knowledge around the city, ultimately contributing to the
construction of an urban methodological approach to the commons in the
city and to governing the city itself as a commons.
