---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 8. Designing, Sustaining and Defending Resilient Urban Commons: The Story of R-Urban

by Doina Petrescu and Constantin Petcou

The question of the commons is at the heart of the discussion on
democracy. According to Toni Negri, the contemporary revolutionary
project that is democracy is concerned with capturing, diverting,
appropriating and reclaiming the commons. The commons, in turn, have
been created or are emerging as a key constituent process^1^. It is a
re-appropriation, and at the same time a re-invention.

The question of the commons is also directly related to the discussions
on the major environmental challenges we face: climate change, resources
depletion and related economic and social crises. The environmental
crisis is also a political crisis, a crisis of democracy and a lack of
collective control over the resources of our planet, which is indeed our
biggest commons. Learning how to govern our planet as a commons is part
of the imperative of becoming more resilient^2^. Resilience is a term
used to characterize the way in which systems and societies adapt to
externally imposed change^3^. We understand resilience as a
transformative condition, which allows us not only to adapt but also to
transform and re-invent our society towards a more balanced, more
equitable way of living on Earth. Elinor Ostrom convincingly
demonstrated that the commons could constitute a resilient alternative
to the current way of governing the world’s resources^4^. She mainly
studied traditional rural commons across different global contexts
(exploring fisheries, forests, pastures) and has concluded on a number
of principles on how commons can be successfully governed.

## Urban Commons

Sheila Foster and Christian Iaione, two leading scholars in the emerging
field of urban commons, have shown that the conditions are far more
complex in cities^5^. Urban commons are ‘constructed commons’ that need
a complex governance system. They involve not only commoners but also
other urban actors who are external to the community of commoners. These
actors are often in multiple interactions with a commons: public actors
such as municipalities and the state, private actors such as companies
and organizations - as well as various other communities.

> Commons oblige architects to design collectively and accessibly, to
> take privilege and commodity out of design. In a long-term process of
> commoning, their design should assemble and mobilise, rather than
> segregate and exclude.

Urban commons have to be understood, designed, supported and re-invented
as part of a complex process of transition towards more resilient forms
of governance of the cities. For this we need new institutions, new
protocols, a whole new infrastructure and agents to manage this process.
When we founded ‘atelier d’architecture autogérée’, a collective of
architects, we asked ourselves what we as architects can contribute to
this. We realised that designing and sustaining urban commons is a
special challenge for architects: it obliges them to design collectively
and accessibly. It requires them to take privilege and commodity out of
design. In a long-term process of commoning, their design should
assemble and mobilise, rather than segregate and exclude.

## R-Urban

This was the motivation for atelier d’architecture autogérée when we
engaged with urban commons^6^. We started in 2001 with Ecobox, which was
a community garden made out of recycled materials and a social-cultural
center installed on a derelict site on Rue Pajol in Paris. We continued
in 2006 with Passage 56 in the 20th *arrondissement*, which was a
self-managed ‘ecological interstice’ instigating local ecological cycles
in the neighborhood and enabling the production and recycling of most of
its resources: electricity, water, compost and food. Although local,
both of these self-managed projects generated local networks of urban
commons, initiated by their stakeholders.

In 2008, we imagined a strategy model called R-Urban as an open-source
framework that enables residents to play an active role in changing the
city while at the same time changing their way of living in it^7^. The
‘R’ in R-Urban stands for ‘resilience’, a term that we understood in
relation with the capacity of communities not only to take risks, but
also to transform themselves in the face of rapid global economic and
environmental changes. ‘R’ also signifies ‘resourcefulnes’, situating
resilience in a positive light and relating it to the agency of
community empowerment^8^.

Within the R-Uban framework we wanted to create a network of bottom-up
resilience in order to give more agency to citizens and grassroots
organizations around a series of self-managed collective hubs. These
self-managed collective hubs host economic and cultural activities and
everyday life practices that contribute to boosting the capacity of
resilience within neighbourhoods. All of these hub also constitute a
network of commons exploration, to develope and celebrate communities’
resources: space, skills, knowledge, labour and creativity.

## Designing

R-Urban has been conceived and initiated by architectural designers, yet
the framework itself is co-produced and open to a wide range of actors.
The first step in the implementation of the R-Urban strategy is the
installation of physical infrastructure that would create assets for
these new self-managed collective hubs. This can be achieved by using
available land as well as other existing assets that could be used
temporarily. In these spaces, change can be initiated, tested, learned
and practiced.

The second stage would involve stakeholders who could use the space
provided to share resources and training materials. Other allied
organizations and initiatives would also be able to be plugged into the
proposed network of civic hubs. The strategy would enable locally closed
ecological circuits at the level of the neighbourhoods, balancing the
activities of production and consumption: CO2 emissions would be
reduced, water and compost carefully managed and waste would be
collected and transformed locally under the control of the people
involved in the network.

In 2009, we succesfully pitched this model to the municipality of
Colombes, a suburban city near Paris. We subsequently set up a
partnership for a EU Life+ bid on environmental governance, with which
we were successful. In 2011, we identified assets for three possible
civic hubs: one for urban agriculture, one for recycling and
eco-construction, and the third for cooperative housing.

Agrocité was the first hub, which we set up on a social housing estate.
The plot belonged to the city and would be available for about 10 years.
Based on this projected timeline, we imagined a demountable building,
alongside a 1700 square meter plot of land that would included an
experimental farm, a community-garden and a pedagogical garden. Another
building included a small market, a café, a greenhouse and educational
facilities.

The building and the site would function themselves under principles of
economic and ecological circuits. The architecture and spatial
organisation were meant to reveal and showcase these circuits, which
otherwise would have remained invisible. These circuits would be part of
a network that performs at a local scale, with the idea that it could
progressively scale up to city and regional level. We started with the
community garden as a way of engaging with the local community and the
first harvest took place before we began to build. For the construction
of the building we used re-cycled materials to showcase the ecological
principles on which the strategy was based. From the beginning, we had
an economic concern about the function of the building. Our aim was to
host explicit economic activities (such as a market or café) at the same
time as collective activities that have to do with informal social
economies, such as exchange of skills and knowledge and bartering^9^.

We also prototyped a number of ecological devices. For example, we
constructed a water-filtration device that was self-built with
specialist help. It was the first of its kind in an urban setting. We
also tested compost-heating, green walls, drip irrigation and a
rainwater container to collect and use rainwater. We compiled quite
sophisticated studies on watering and cultivation techniques for the
poor urban soil we inherited. Urban agriculture in densely built
suburban estates is a completely new field of practice, which explains
why many of these techniques and devices needed to be invented.

Recyclab was the second hub we implemented, this time as a social
enterprise. It is a recycling and eco-construction unit comprised of
several facilities for storing and reusing locally salvaged materials,
by transforming them into eco-construction elements. We set up a
‘fablab’ for residents to use. Both hubs were built with ‘reversable
design’ on temporarily available public land. They could easily be
relocated and rebuilt at any time. The reversibility is an ecological
principle implying that the site can be repurposed by other urban
programmes, according to evolving needs and conditions. The building
itself can be dismantled and repurposed in a different context for
different users.

The third hub, Ecohab, was planned to be a cooperative housing hub.
Unfortunately, the project was blocked by municipal politicians.

## Sustaining

Commoning involves making and sharing that which supports a community.
The practice of commoning is at the same time the practice of becoming
community: working out how to access, use, care for, take responsibility
for and distribute its benefits. Commoning can take place on private or
public property. It can be practiced around open-access resources, such
as the atmosphere or waterways, over which there are no formal rules of
ownership. It is very important to remember that all those involved in
the R-Urban hubs are inhabitants of a working-class neighbourhood. Many
are unemployed, and some are retired, but they have become the main
stakeholders in these projects based on their self-employment or
voluntary work.

> The practice of commoning is at the same time the practice of becoming
> community: working out how to access, use, care for, take
> responsibility for and distribute its benefits.

In the Agrocité hub there was a local market where produce from the
garden, objects from Recyclab and local handicrafts were sold. Local
economy and entrepreneurship were actively supported. A good example is
one of the inhabitants who we supported to set up a worm compost
business. We set up a compost farm with him and he produced compost for
the garden in exchange for using the land for his wormery. He also set
up a Compost School and received accreditation as a compost specialist
trainer. He now makes a living as a trainer. Many local municipalities
need such a specialist, since organic waste is now processed by public
services. In two years, he has trained 160 compost masters and many of
his pupils have now set up their own compost businesses.

R-Urban advocates a specific cultural and political change, which is to
change *how we do things* in order to change our future. Our hope is
that new collective practices of civic resilience can emerge, which both
reduce the ecological footprint and contribute to reinventing
relationships between individuals and collectives.

Such transformational change must take place at the micro-scale of each
individual to enable the building of a culture of co-produced resilience
at the macro-scale. Commoning means not only having the capacity to
acquire space and managing it, but also having the capacity to build
relationships that can be maintained and strenghtened into the future.
The work of R-Urban has produced ecological repair in a region where
much of the land was destitute. Non-human actors contributed to this
work – plants, birds, insects, worms, bacteria – that somehow became
part of the commoning community. ‘More-than-human communities’^10^
emerged around the R-Urban eco-commons.

Collective governance, as Elinor Ostrom demonstrated, is an essential
issue for a commoning community^11^. Agreements are needed and a shared
concerns must be expressed, not to destroy but to support community
resources. In our case this was initiated through a series of gatherings
and talks. Some were about decision-making, others were on very
technical subjects, concerning how ecological loops could work. It was
also important to bring external people to these sites, such as other
organisations, institutions and researchers. This meant opening up the
co-production process to those that were not the immediate users. As
well as the crucial participation of the neighbourhood, the R-Urban
governance strategy involved many local, regional and international
actors. The project enabled a trans-local anchoring with the aim of
greater sustainability.

## Defending

Some institutional partners where more critical than others. One of the
key institutional partners was the municipality, which was effectively
the landowner. After the local elections in 2014, all those municipal
agents involved in the foundation of the project left. They were
replaced by a new right-wing municipal team with a very ambitious mayor.
She was ideologically against the project and she decided that the
municipality would stop the partnership and reclaim the space occupied
by the R-Urban hubs for new private developments. This demonstrated how
much the process of commoning depends on politics. We were missing a
Partner-State^12^. It turned out that that was critical for the
transition towards commons-based urban governance, to facilitate citizen
initiatives and to guarantee sustainability beyond the whims of
political cycles.

The local decision to dismantle R-Urban triggered a wave of solidarity
amongst researchers and residents of Colombes. They have since engaged
in different forms of protest against the new political reality. This
was a new stage within the commoning process, which was now framed as an
advocacy campaign and political struggle to defend the socio-ecological
commons, to challenge the local government and claim recognition of the
success of the project. A protest petition claiming the positive impact
of Agrocité and the other urban units has collected 17,000 signatures.
Finally, we lost the case in court for the simple reason that current
laws protect private property and do not value the interests of common
use or the social and ecological benefits of a civic project. We
realised that continuing the opposition on site in Colombes would have
only drained the energy of the community. We chose to give up on
resistance politics and embrace the adversity by turning it into a new
positive start. We decided to relocate the project to the neighbouring
city of Gennevilliers, at a small distance from the former location, to
be able to allow the users to continue with the project.

> A partner-state is critical for the transition towards commons-based
> urban governance, to facilitate citizen initiatives and to guarantee
> sustainability beyond the whims of political cycles.

In 2017, Agrocité was reconstructed in Gennevilliers and Recyclab was
dismantled and rebuilt in Nanterre. Other municipalities have also shown
interest and we have commenced R-Urban Bagneux, where we are currently
building two new units. There is also a R-Urban unit in London. Instead
of weakening us, our loss in Colombes emboldened us. R-Urban will grow.
In order to strengthen the R-Urban commons, we have thickened
institutional support and diversified our alliances. There is now a
charter, a development agency and a regional network. The R-Urban
network now has seven hubs with more than 500 citizens actively involved
in using and managing the hubs. We hope that R-Urban will further grow
into a civic movement for resilient urban commons^13^.
