---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: A New Vision for a Shared Digital Europe
Article-status: accepted
Author: Sophie Bloemen, Alek Tarkowski, Paul Keller
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


![](imgs/Ch_4_Digital_commons.jpg)
Reclaiming Digital Commons

# 10. A New Vision for a Shared Digital Europe

by Sophie Bloemen, Alek Tarkowski and Paul Keller

Digitalisation has led much of our interaction, communication and
economic activity to take place in the digital space through data or
over online intermediaries. What kind of space should this digital
sphere be?

For the last 10 years, Europe has focused on regulating the digital
space towards building a Digital Single Market in Europe. This approach
does not suffice to address challenges that are ahead of us. We believe
that seeing this space as a market place only does not do it justice.
This space is in effect our society – a society that is experiencing a
digital transformation. Therefore we cannot accept the digital sphere as
a place where only market dynamics rule. Society is more than an
interaction between market players and people are more than
entrepreneurs or consumers.

Today, market orthodoxy limits our ability to deal with the domination
by corporate monopolies that constrain both individual freedom online
and the emergence of a truly European civic space. This market focus
needs to be replaced with an approach that is society-centric at its
heart.

We believe that Europe needs to establish its own rules for the digital
space, which embody our values: strong public institutions, democratic
governance, sovereignty of communities and people, diversity of European
cultures, equality and justice. A space that is common to all of us, but
at the same time diverse and decentralised. This requires Europe to
enable self-determination, to cultivate the commons, to decentralise
infrastructure and to empower public institutions.

## Enable self-determination

Self-determination in the digital environment refers to the right to
privacy and the need for more democratic models of data governance and
algorithmic transparency. The call for self-determination in the digital
environment is a reaction to the growing market power of a handful of
platform providers who increasingly control the digital space. It is
also a call for using digital tools to support sovereignty at community,
municipal and regional levels. Technology should serve the common good
and support broad citizen participation, instead of solely aiming for
purely commercial objectives and outcomes.

Our daily lives are impacted by a globalised market in which such
commercial entities are exceptionally wealthy and powerful. We not only
use their products and services, but, especially within the digital
space, share data about ourselves in exchange for free or discounted use
of these products and services. Data-driven corporations extract value
from users to process, trade and commercialise for maximum profit.
Within this process, data is used to manipulate users and to further
increase the consumption of products.

> Data-driven corporations extract value from users to process, trade
> and commercialise for maximum profit. Within this process, data is
> used to manipulate users and to further increase the consumption of
> products.

At the level of individuals, this translates into challenges with regard
to users’ personal data and privacy. At the level of the society, this
becomes an issue of a market capture of data as a resource that is
shaping our education, our housing, our transport, our environments, as
well as our identities, according to commercial interests without any
democratic debate on the direction taken. Citizens have no agency in
this process and lack control.

This lack of control over data is not just an in issue with regard to
commercial products and services. The public sector is increasingly
relying on data analysis and algorithmic decision-making. There is a
growing body of examples of detrimental effects from this type of
automated decision-making on people in marginalised positions - and
algorithmic bias can ultimately adversely affect all citizens.

By calling for self-determination in the digital environment we ask for
something more fundamental than the individual legal right to privacy.
It must be possible to fully participate in (online) social life without
having to give up your (personal) data to commercial entities. The role
of data and how it is used in surveilling and influencing users needs to
be made transparent to the general public and users need to have
meaningful opportunities to minimise data collection and control its
use.

Yet, self-determination cannot be achieved by only thinking about
protecting privacy in terms of individual rights. We need to rethink
privacy as a public good, because the increasing use of personal data by
tech companies and governments is not only impacting the individual, but
has larger societal consequences. More broadly speaking, there is need
for democratization of data governance aimed at improving our standards
with respect to personal data extraction and processing. We need more
robust oversight of these practices.

> The role of data and how it is used in surveilling and influencing
> users needs to be made transparent to the general public and users
> need to have meaningful opportunities to minimise data collection and
> control its use.

In this context we also see self-determination relating to solidarity.
Solidarity in terms of not leaving everything to the individual but
facing these challenges of the digital transformation as a collective.
Collectively and in solidarity with each other we can set standards for
a society that is democratic and where citizens are protected from
commodification, privacy intrusion and surveillance. We should
collectively work to realise a digital environment that instead
facilitates self realisation, creativity and diversity.

## Cultivate the Commons

The digital age has opened the door to many collaborative forms of
creating, remixing and sharing knowledge and culture. The success of
free and open-source software, tens of thousands contributors to
Wikipedia and the flourishing open-design and manufacturing community
are notable realms in which collaborative activity has transformed 20th
century models of knowledge production. Hackerspaces and fab labs are
massively pioneering new forms of distributed local production while
tapping into a global knowledge ecosystem.

Creative Commons licenses use intellectual property law to place
knowledge and culture in the commons. Developments in open science and
innovation are changing the way science is being performed. Open science
makes scientific research, data and publications accessible to all
levels of inquiry: society, amateur, or professional. A key vehicle for
disseminating scientific knowledge and maintaining it as a commons is
open access publishing. The platform cooperativism movement, which sees
digital platforms themselves as forms of the commons, is another
example.

The digital-networked environment allows us to put a bigger emphasis on
supporting commons-based alternatives to the market that have the
potential to create huge social value. Developing digital spaces that
are managed as a commons with appropriate governance structures is
essential to creating a digital environment that is democratic and
supports values at the heart of European societies. Spaces, resources
and projects managed as a commons need to be seen as equal alternatives
to market mechanisms.

Yet today, the digital commons are pushed to the margins of the online
environment by commercial monopolies that over the years have overtaken
the open sharing and peer-to-peer communication channels of the
Internet. For each success of the digital commons - such as Wikipedia,
which remains one of the most popular non-commercial, online platforms
in Europe - we observe even more places where market logic limits the
potential of the commons. The potential of digital technologies to offer
open access to crucial knowledge and cultural resources is not being
fulfilled. Similarly, spaces in which digital technologies are employed
to share resources are quickly captured by dominant market platforms
thant seek a commercial rent on the basis of the contributions of users.

> The digital commons are pushed to the margins of the online
> environment by commercial monopolies that over the years have
> overtaken the open sharing and peer-to-peer communication channels of
> the Internet.

The commons approach overlaps with or feeds into an emerging political
discourse where wellbeing and social wealth are not defined in terms of
narrow economic criteria like GDP or corporate profit. Instead it looks
to a richer, more qualitative set of criteria that cannot be easily
measured: moral legitimacy, participation, equity, resilience, social
cohesion and social justice. It promotes a regenerative economy based on
circular principles and its primary aims are to maintain a sustainable
system for people and the planet. Local community and participatory
culture are core building blocks of such a system.

Europe has the opportunity to strengthen, promote and facilitate
commoning activities and commons-based production. European policymakers
need to adopt a hybrid approach, in which market-based and commons-based
solutions are considered side-by-side as governance models for core
aspects, spaces and layers of the Internet stack. We need to identify
situations in which a "commons-first" approach should be adopted.
European policies that support open science and open access to
scholarship and data in the European Research Area are a great example
of such an approach. Supporting a decentralised, community-based sharing
economy that supports local commons is something that can be legislated
at the EU level and which will have a real impact on the ground.

## Decentralise Infrastructure

Decentralisation is the basic shift caused in the past by core network
technologies, from the original packet-switching networks, through
peer-to-peer content networks, to currently developed blockchain-based
solutions. Decentralised infrastructure is open, distributed and shared.
It is an infrastructure that can also function as a commons, and can be
governed in a democratic and self-determined manner.

In the last decade, centralised and even monopolistic services have been
built on top of the decentralised infrastructure of the Internet. Since
these are all very large and often non-European commercial entities, the
centralisation of control over the digital networks is a form of market
capture of a resource that should be treated as a universal basic
service that needs to be governed as a commons. Centralisation of the
Internet and the creation of online monopolies has been fueled by a
successful shift to business strategies that focus on monetisation of
data instead of content. This development has led to a concentration of
power in the hands of a few dominant platforms, most of which are
located outside of Europe either in the US or China. As a result, much
of the development of the Internet and related areas of information
technology is being shaped outside of the EU.

> The centralisation of control over the digital networks is a form of
> market capture of a resource that should be treated as a universal
> basic service that needs to be governed as a commons.

As the Internet becomes more and more ubiquitous, with
Internet-of-Things solutions diffusing in the real world, the issue of
(de)centralisation concerns more than just online data and content
flows. The urban environment is intertwined with the way we manage
knowledge and our web-based economies. Similarly, the current wave of
technological change and disruption related to the broad class of
artificial intelligence technologies has the potential to exacerbate
centralisation.

In the last few years, Europe has attempted to counter the dominance of
big technology companies by leveraging antitrust regulatory policies,
which can be seen as targeting centralisation of the Internet within the
boundaries of market-focused policies. Yet, decentralisation policy
cannot function solely on the basis of regulation aimed at managing
market competition - although it is a step in the right direction.
Decentralisation is also a necessity because it can contribute to
increasing democratic control. At the same time decentralization will
not be the answer to all challenges, and should be regarded as being a
rule that allows exceptions where it makes sense.

A decentralised approach to digital infrastructures should be applied at
different levels of the technological stack of the Internet: First,
decentralisation should remain a basic principle of the Internet.
Second, decentralisation should be applied to the level of online
services and should be seen as an alternative to the current model, in
which data and content flows, communication and social interactions is
captured by monopolistic aggregators.

An effort to decentralise the digital infrastructure must provide more
room for public institutions and abstain from traditional approaches to
solving societal challenges built on top-down control. We see public
institutions as important drivers of a decentralised network of actors,
who cooperate on ‘missions’ to face societal challenges at grand scale.
Decentralisation of digital infrastructures that increasingly govern our
societies could be such a mission.

Decentralising our technological infrastructure must aim at increasing
Europe's technological sovereignty by reducing dependency on
non-European technology providers and to enable fair competition and
ensure accountability of service providers. It must also take into
account democratic traditions and historic diversity. As such it should
provide more agency to European cities - cooperating in the municipalist
movement - that are looking for ways to develop decentralised solutions
that gain from the relative power and independence of cities as actors.

## Empower Public Institutions

Europe has a long and rich history of delivering public goods and
services through public institutions. Publicly-funded cultural heritage
institutions contribute to our identity, and encourage learning and
creativity. Public libraries serve as knowledge hubs and play an
important role in providing access to marginalised groups. Public
schools and universities are the bedrock of our educational systems and
public service broadcasting organisations ensure the provision of
quality news and information and allow for diversity of cultural
expression. Public institutions are also best placed to assure broad
democratic civic participation on how our knowledge, science and culture
are governed.

The digital revolution has created the preconditions that would allow
these institutions to better fulfill their missions by actively
involving communities in decision making and the generation of culture.
The Internet provides them with more ways to reach (new) audiences and
to decouple their activities from the restraints of place and time. At
the same time these institutions and the values that are embedded within
them are under attack. This challenge comes in two different forms. In
many countries, there is increasing pressure on the independence of
these institutions by governments. In parallel, large commercial market
players question the very logic of public provision of public goods and
services in attempts to grow their own markets. As a result, the
potential of public institutions and small and medium sized digital
companies to uphold inclusivity, democracy, and equality of our
societies in the digital age has been largely dormant; many of these
institutions struggle to find their role in the digital environment.

> If we understand the Internet as a market-driven platform dominated by
> global conglomerates and not as a basic universal service and a public
> infrastructure, we abandon our ability to protect our democratic
> systems and to shield citizens from over-commodification.

If we understand the Internet as a market-driven platform dominated by
global conglomerates and not as a basic universal service and a public
infrastructure, we abandon our ability to protect our democratic systems
and to shield citizens from over-commodification. Our current policies
in the digital area fail to empower public institutions, and instead
hold them back from innovation in the delivery of public services.
Outdated and inflexible copyright laws are limiting research and
education and prevent cultural heritage institutions from sharing their
collections online. Public service broadcasters are reduced to continue
providing linear programming that mimics the radio and television
channels of the 20th century instead of developing online-first
strategies that can challenge the attention-monopolies of social media
platforms. Education and learning is confined to formal educational
institutions instead of embedded in the fabric of everyday life.

The majority of these limitations are undertaken in order to "protect"
the market from undue competition. Instead of envisioning the Internet
as a true public space in which publicly funded institutions play an
important and visible role as producers of content, they are confined to
the margins. The lack of strategies for a digital transformation of
public institutions means that we have largely surrendered the digital
environment to the ever-increasing influence of commercial online
platforms that erode our democratic values.

A Europe that seeks to develop its own position in the digital age that
is true to its decades-old tradition of public institutions needs to
empower these same institutions to provide meaningful services and to
provide the public with shared online spaces that are protected from the
surveillance practices of commercial platforms.

Instead of slowly eroding these institutions in the interest of an
ever-expanding market sector, it is necessary to create strong public
institutions that can compete with commercial platforms when it comes to
access to information, knowledge, culture. Public institutions should
take the lead in ensuring that our values and democracy can flourish in
the digital age.

## Towards a Shared Digital Europe

Combine these four elements with a truly European set of values and a
new strategy presents itself. A strategy that understands the digital
space as a hybrid space, both a market and a public space where the
commons can also thrive. A strategy that policy makers and civil society
actors can use to counter the current lack of democratic oversight in
the digital space, the deteriorating online debate, the monopolisation
of the digital sphere, the enclosure of knowledge and the means of
knowledge production and the increasing violation of human rights in the
digital space.

Most importantly our Vision for a Shared Digital Europe provides policy
makers with an opportunity to work towards a truly European idea about
how society should function in the digital age.

*(This text is an abbreviated version of the vision published in April
2019 on <https://shared-digital.eu>)*^1^
