---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: Developing Innovative Drugs
Article-status: accepted
Author: Jean-Francois Allesandrini, Benjamin Coriat, Spring Gombe
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 15. Developing Innovative Drugs Through the Commons: Lessons from the DNDi Experience

by  Benjamin Coriat, Philippe Abecassis, Jean-Francois Allesandrini, Nathalie Coutinet and Stéphanie Leyronas

In this paper we argue that DNDi, even though it belongs to the family
of Product Development Partnerships (PDPs) created at the end of the
20th century, has followed a very particular trajectory, that allows us
to characterize it as a distinctive commons in the field of public
health. We illustrate this view by focusing on two features: DNDi’s
promotion of *collaborative platforms* and its innovative *intellectual
property policy.*

## From PDP to Commons: DNDi’s trajectory

To fully understand the significance of the DNDi project, it is
necessary to look back at the end of the 20th century. This period saw
heated international debate on the developing world’s shortcomings in
the availability of and access to care.^1^ A distressing imbalance in
the supply of drugs became clear: 90% of research and development (R&D)
was conducted for the benefit of the 10% most wealthy and credit-worthy
patients.^2^ This concern was fuelled by the sudden tightening of
Intellectual Property (IP) standards following the signature of the
Trade-Related Aspects of the Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS)
Agreement in 1994.^3^ The changes set up by the TRIPS Agreement included
the compulsory patenting of therapeutic molecules in all signatory
countries, thus creating a unified global market for patented drugs
regardless of countries’ levels of development.^4^

This setting gave rise to a series of institutional innovations to
transform the fight against neglected diseases. These innovations
especially converged under the form of Product Development Partnerships
(PDPs), themselves largely based on new open innovation concepts.^5^
These PDPs can be described as not-for-profit organisations dedicated to
promoting the development of R&D in the field of neglected diseases. The
first PDPs created for R&D in neglected diseases were the International
Aids Vaccine Initiative (IAVI) and Medicines for Malaria Venture (MMV).
They were followed by PDPs that mostly focused on medical products
(vaccines, diagnostics, drugs, microbicides, etc.).

DNDi was part of this second wave of PDPs, but also showed unique
characteristics. This distinctiveness makes its analysis through the
lens of commons – rather than that of PDPs – particularly insightful.

## The Shift from Global Public Goods to Commons and its Relevance in Understanding DNDi

Before reviewing some of the main features of DNDi through the lens of
the commons, some insights are needed on the commons approach,
especially as an alternative to the narrative on Global Public Goods
(GPGs) that until recently was dominant regarding public health.

GPGs were introduced at the end of the 20th century as a broadened
understanding of public goods within the traditional neoclassical
framework.^6^ Along with the archetypal GPGs – air, atmosphere, water –
public health was often described as a GPG. After two to three decades,
the GPGs approach has given way to a number of limitations and
critiques, mainly that it perpetuates the standard economic vision based
on the defense of property rights and efficiency.^7,8^

> The goal is first to support clinical research and then to facilitate
> the access of treatment for the greatest number of people, especially
> the most vulnerable populations.

The commons approach sets quite a different perspective. It questions
the very roots of the GPGs approach, which focuses almost exclusively on
regulations in a world seen as governed by agents in pursuit of private
interests. While it does not exclude at all the need for appropriate
regulations, the commons approach attaches at least equal importance
to the establishment of local, decentralised and largely self-organised
entities.

To be qualified as a commons, an organisation or institution should
ideally combine three characteristics: i) they bring together, around an
existing resource - and/or in view of producing a new resource - a group
of self-organised actors that have committed themselves to some forms of
sharing of the resource’s use or creation (“shared resource”); ii) they
allocate to the various actors a set of rights and obligations regarding
the way in which the resource shall be treated and its benefits shared
(“rules”); and iii) they establish forms of governance to promote the
compliance with these rights and obligations (“governance”).^9^ Commons
that meet these criteria come in various forms based on their goals and
the nature of their institutional arrangements.

In addition to these formal characteristics of commons, two moral and
political considerations conceived from the outset as an intrinsic part
of their identity ought to be highlighted. First, the *ecology* of the
system considered is at the very core of the construction of a commons:
the rules implemented by commoners must therefore target the
reproduction or joint enrichment of the resource and the community
around it.^10^ Second, equity is key. It is ensured by governance in the
case of commons formed from exhaustible resources and characterized by
universal access in the case of commons that are not rival and not
exhaustible such as intangible goods or knowledge.

Based on these definitions, we argue that while DNDi does belong to the
large PDP’s family, it presents several distinctive features that
render its analysis through the lens of commons relevant and powerful.
Beyond its own governance and funding mechanisms that very much echo a
multi-partner-based commons model, two of its characteristics will be
further explored here: its promotion of collaborative platforms and
intellectual property policy.

## Collaborative Platforms conceived as commons-based innovative entities

A good illustration of DNDi’s philosophy is the collaborative clinical
research platforms set up, once a candidate molecule has been
identified. The platforms provide a network of medical and scientific
skills to promote a common approach for health authorities in endemic
countries, as well as to define R&D priorities and product profile of
drugs (i.e. main characteristics on efficacy, tolerance, mode of
administration, dosage regimen, duration of treatment, price, etc.) with
the objective to be delivered at affordable price. Their goal is first
to support clinical research (Phase 2 and Phase 3 clinical trials) and
then to facilitate the access of treatment for the greatest number of
people, especially the most vulnerable populations.

> The mission of DNDi is to develop safe, effective and affordable new
> treatments for patients suffering from neglected diseases, and to
> ensure equitable access to these treatments.

Primarily located in low-income countries, platform partners vary
according to the goals pursued. They generally include national disease
control programmes where they exist, health ministries, universities,
civil society representatives, pharmaceutical companies, health
professionals, patients’ associations, and are open to donors.
Currently, DNDi has three active platforms: the Chagas Clinical
Research Platform created in Brazil in 2009 (400 members; 22 countries;
100 institutions); the Human African Trypanosomiasis Platform created in
2005 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (120 members; eight
countries; 20 institutions); and the Leishmaniasis East Africa Platform
created in 2003 in Sudan (60 members; four countries; 13 institutions).^11^

One must note that, while initiated and funded by DNDi, these platforms
do not belong to DNDi but to the medical and scientific community that
works within them. Their fundamental objective is to consolidate new
skills and introduce them into national and local programmes, thereby
strengthening local infrastructure.

## DNDi’s Innovative Intellectual Property Rights Policy

In the field of Intellectual Property Rights Policy, DNDi’s distinction
lies in the fact that *its policy relies first and foremost on the
primacy of access to treatment*, as set by its founding documents which
state that *“the mission of* DNDi *is to develop safe, effective and
affordable new treatments for patients suffering from neglected
diseases, and to ensure equitable access to these treatments”*. This
commitment to initiate affordable treatments for which access is
equitable has given rise to an innovative IP policy designed to make it
possible, if necessary, to reconcile the right of access to treatment of
underprivileged and poor populations and the right that certain research
partners, especially pharmaceutical companies involved in the research
process, can retain to exploit under given limits the molecules shared
in the platforms on which they hold patents.

In this way, DNDi is fully committed to a concept of ownership seen as a
bundle of rights, a characteristic of the commons approach, whereby
different attributes of property rights are distributed and allocated to
different types of partners.^12^

## Multiple Forms of the Bundles of Rights

A variety of examples with the private sector illustrate the different
solutions, implemented and described above. One of them is the
partnership concluded in 2008 between DNDi and Anacor, a biotech company
since then acquired by Pfizer. This agreement gave DNDi access to a
class of therapeutic compounds, held by Anacor, whose applications were
still unknown. DNDi could conduct research for a specific indication,
sleeping sickness. DNDi was granted non-exclusive rights to the
molecule(s) for all applications that may result from its research in
this field, while Anacor retained their rights for any other indication.
Other examples include the development of the antimalarial *ASAQ
Winthrop* by DNDi and Sanofi, the licensed agreement between DNDi and
Presidio Pharmaceuticals on treatment for hepatitis C, or the agreements
signed with Abbvie and Sanofi.^5^

Thus, IP policy is designed, through appropriate allocation of rights to
the different partners to safeguard the principle of “needs driven” R&D
activity and the benefits and access to treatment to a large number of
people, especially the most vulnerable populations.^13^

## The Shift from “Neglected Diseases” to “Neglected Patients”: Challenges and opportunities

In 2015 DNDi decided to take an additional step when DNDi’s mission
evolved from “neglected diseases” to encompass “neglected patients”.
This shift represented a major change. Indeed, the broadening of DNDi’s
focus called for some modifications of its business model. One of the
challenges was to gather additional revenue to be able to face this new
expanded mission. How can DNDi evolve and scale-up and remain truthful
to this mission? More specifically, the question that appeared was: can
DNDi effectively derive additional resources from IP – since it is
basically an entity dedicated to R&D activities – while keeping true to
its founding principles?

Whilst this is largely hypothetical, some options are worth mentioning
in order to open up future discussions.

## Differentiated Pricing Based on License Policy

One source of additional revenue could be generated from the transfer of
licences and hence of exploitation rights at prices that vary according
to populations and/or territories. It somewhat interestingly evokes the
commons-based ‘reciprocity licences’ used in many fields, especially
open-source software. According to this practice, *the commoners* who
have invested time and resources in the production of the shared
material have free and unimpeded access to the licenced material
produced by the commons. On the other hand, third parties who have not
participated in such production may use the material in exchange for the
payment of a compensation to the commons. Reciprocity licensing is an
avenue worth exploring to safeguard the principle of needs-driven
research. These licenses may represent an opportunity by *reducing the
burden for fundraising (and the competition with other NGOs for these
funds) while increasing the organisation’s autonomy to pursue its own
objectives*.

## Funding for Dual Destination Drugs

DNDi’s shift from neglected diseases to neglected people could lead to
investments in diseases and drugs that target patients, not only in
developing but also in developed countries. For instance, DNDi is
developing a new hepatitis treatment potentially addressing markets in
developed countries. DNDi could therefore become eligible for grants
and/or contracts with different research organisations. DNDi’s ability
to develop molecules and bring them to the market at costs considerably
lower than those dictated by pharmaceutical companies held to huge
payments to satisfy their shareholders, could generate significant
savings for these countries. DNDi could therefore receive funds in the
form of grants or advances for its commitment to research projects of
national interest. In return, the research results and hence the
compounds would be governed by special licenses allowing their use for
free or at greatly reduced prices, once they are included on the lists
of prescribed drugs reimbursed by social healthcare systems.

To conclude, we would argue that since pursuing its primary mission –
the promotion of access to safe, effective and affordable treatments to
the neediest – DNDi has succeeded in transforming public health into a
common good, at least in the field of neglected diseases. Thus, DNDi
already constitutes a distinctive illustration of the commons approach
in the area of public health.

More generally we can observe that the commons approach is not only
insightful today: it also sheds light on the importance of the changes
to come for DNDi, in the context of a shift from neglected diseases to
neglected people. All commons, including DNDi, cannot live off donations
and grants indefinitely. Their sustainability depends on their ability
to continue to diversify their funding sources and to generate their own
resources more substantially. The capability of commons to create
institutions and business models that satisfy essential needs while
guaranteeing universal access, especially for the neediest, is without
doubt essential for the future of our societies.

*This paper is based on the following working paper: “DNDi, a Distinctive Illustration of Commons in the Area of Public Health”, Abecassis et al. (2019), AFD Research Papers #2019-93*